# The ea65 driver

This section describes the ea65 driver which works with the front panel
VFD display on the AOpen XC Cube-AV EA65 media barebone.

## EA65 front panel VFD

The AOpen XC Cube-AV is a barebone designed for using as a media center.
It comes with a front panel display which is capable of displaying one
line of 9 characters.

The display is internally connected to the serial port (`/dev/ttyS1`)
with a fixed rate of 9600 baud.

The display uses 13 segments per character. That's why the driver
provides no custom characters like the ones for dot matrix displays do.

The front panel furthermore has 9 keys which are illuminated by blue
LEDs. The LEDs can be controlled with the backlight functions. The keys
are not supported by this driver. The red LED (RECORD) can be controlled
with the `output` command of LCDd.

## Configuration in LCDd.conf

### \[ea65\]

  - Brightness = `BRIGHTNESS`  
    Set the brightness for the front LEDs if backlight is switched on.
    Legal values for BRIGHTNESS are in the range between `0` and `1000`.
    Values under `300` set the LEDs off. Values between `300` and `700`
    turn on the LEDs with half brightness. Values above `700` turn on
    the LEDs with full brightness. If not given, it defaults to `500`.

  - OffBrightness = `OFFBRIGHTNESS`  
    Set the brightness for the front LEDs if backlight is switched off.
    Legal values for OFFBRIGHTNESS are in the range between `0` and
    `1000`. Values under `300` set the LEDs off. Values between `300`
    and `700` turn on the LEDs with half brightness. Values above `700`
    turn on the LEDs with full brightness. If not given, it defaults to
    `0`.
