# The Toshiba T6963 Driver

This section talks about using LCDproc with LCD displays that use the
T6963 chipset from Toshiba. Usually, this chipset is used on big
graphical LCD displays that can often act as a screen.

The driver uses the text mode of the chipset with a custom font loaded
which resembles the characters from HD44780 ROM 002 character set
(European character set). If your display has a 'Font Select' pin it
must be wired to use the 6x8 font.

Only displays in 'Single Scan' configurations are supported. Displays
configured as 'Dual Scan' are currently not supported. Those use
on-board memory differently. Check the datasheet of your display\!

## Connections

> **Warning**
> 
> Displays using T6963 chipset come in a variety of pin-outs and power
> configurations. They usually require negative voltage for contrast and
> some displays have a negative voltage generator on-board. Therefore
> the wiring table below does only list signal names, not LCD pins. Be
> sure to get the correct datasheet for your display and identify the
> pins to use\!
> 
> We do not give wiring examples for power, contrast, and other control
> lines. You have to figure out this from your display's datasheet\!

| Parallel port | \<-\> | LCD |         |    |
| ------------- | ----: | :-: | ------- | -- |
| nSTRB         |     1 |     | /WR     | \* |
| D0-D7         |   2-9 |     | DB0-DB7 | \* |
| nLF           |    14 |     | /CE     | \* |
| INIT          |    16 |     | C/D     | \* |
| nSEL          |    17 |     | /RD     | \* |
|               |       | VDD | FS      | \* |

T6963 wiring schematic

## Compiling

Make sure that the T6963 files are built when you run configure. This
can be done by specifying "--enable-drivers=all" or by
"--enable-drivers=t6963".

## Configuration in LCDd.conf

### \[t6963\]

  - Size = PARAMETERS.SIZE  
    Set display size in pixels \[default: `128x64`\]. The size in
    characters is automatically calculated assuming the font size is set
    to `6x8` for the display.

  - Port = `PORT`  
    Specify the address of the parallel port the LCD is connected to.
    Common values for PORT are `0x278`, `0x378` and `0x3BC`. Legal
    values are `0x200` - `0x400`. If not given the default value is
    `0x378`.

  - bidirectional = PARAMETERS.YESDEFNO  
    Use LPT port in bi-directional mode. \[default: `yes`; legal: `yes`,
    `no`\]
    
    Most LPT ports can be used in bi-directional mode. It is required
    for proper timing of the display. Leave this on unless you
    experience problems.

  - ClearGraphic = PARAMETERS.YESNODEF  
    Clear graphic memory on start-up \[default: `no`; legal: `yes`,
    `no`\]. The T6963 has a graphic and a text area which can be
    combined using several modes. This driver uses default OR-mode.
    Usually the graphic area is empty after power-on but if you see
    random garbage overlaying the text this option may be enabled.

  - delayBus = PARAMETERS.YESNODEF  
    Use additional delay in read / write operations. \[default: `no`;
    legal: `yes`, `no`\]. The display can execute operations very fast.
    As the driver implements busy checking no additional delays are
    required. But if you experience problems you may try to slow down
    communication by enabling this setting.
